=============================================
Metadata standard
=============================================

+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Status   | Version 1.0                                                                               | 
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Audience |  - City staff who publish open data                                                            |
|          |  - Users of open data                                                                          |
|          |  - Anyone interested in how or why the City labels its information assets                      | 
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Contact  |  Hailey Pate                                                                                   |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Feedback |  Questions and feedback are encouraged! Please submit `here.                                   |
|          |  <https://github.com/cityofaustin/open-data-docs/milestones/Metadata%20Standard%20v1.0>`_      |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+



Purpose of this document
=============================

This document explains how to use metadata to describe open data assets held by the City of Austin. By using a common and consistent metadata vocabulary across City departments, we can make it easier for people to discover and use City information. 

About the metadata standard
==============================

When would someone use these metadata standards?
---------------------------------------------------

- An open data liaison publishing a new resource to the City's open data portal
- A City web developer wanting to make a department's open data offerings more discoverable by search engines
- A member of the public looking for a dataset to use in a project

What does the metadata standard contain?
---------------------------------------------------

- A list of descriptors (metadata elements) that should be provided whenever a dataset is published on the open data portal
- Description of when to use the metadata elements
- Details about how to use each element correctly

Design principles
----------------------------------------------------

- Be interoperable with existing standards such as those developed by the Federal Government and popular web search engines
- Start small and increase the number of elements over time
- Develop openly and in close collaboration with end users

When to use these metadata elements:
====================================================

Required
----------------
Use of the standard metadata elements is required when publishing any dataset to the open data portal. The metadata values should also be included in the open data inventory. 
> An open dataset is a table, map, or any other resource that is published to the open data portal.

Optional
----------------
Any time a public dataset is shared internally or publically, it is beneficial to include these metadata elements in a note or accessory file that accompanies the share. All City of Austin staff and partners are welcome to use this standard. 

List of required elements:
====================================


.. raw:: html

	<table border="1" class="docutils">
		<tr>
			<td>Department Name</td>
			<td>The formal name of the Department most closely related to the dataset, according to the current approved budget</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Title</td>
			<td>Human-readable name of the asset. Should be in plain English and include sufficient detail to facilitate search and discovery.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Description</td>
			<td>Human-readable description (e.g., an abstract) with sufficient detail to enable a user to quickly understand whether the asset is of interest.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Format</td>
			<td>What is the primary state or file format for containing this dataset? (i.e. database, excel, CSV, JSON, other)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Data Source</td>
			<td>What is the source system or enterprise application from which the data originates?</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Frequency</td>
			<td>The frequency with which dataset is published.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Estimated Number of Records</td>
			<td>The approximate number of rows or records contained within the dataset.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Contains External Data</td>
			<td>Does this dataset incorporate information generated by agencies/organizations other than City of Austin?</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Sensitivity</td>
			<td>Does the dataset contain any rows and/or columns with potentially sensitive information? Yes or no.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Contact Name</td>
			<td>Contact person’s name and email for the asset.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Contact Email</td>
			<td>Contact person’s name and email for the asset.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Unique Identifier</td>
			<td>A unique identifier for the dataset or API as maintained within an Agency catalog or database.</td>
		</tr>
	</table>


List of optional elements:
====================================

coming soon

.. todo::
   
   - add table for optional elements
   - add link to technical version of the standard
